The spiritual stages can be thought of as like a road map. Different people taking the same trip between two cities may have quite different experiences, even though their maps look the same. Some may drive on a bright sunny day, some in a terrible storm; some may have smooth riding and keep right on course; others have a flat tire or get lost and wander off the road for a time. The value of the map is not that it means everyone’s trip is the same, but that it shows travelers there is a way and a goal, and that many people have taken this journey before.

Philosophically, the schema offers a view of the spiritual way that sees it as a long process, like life itself, throughout which psychological or spiritual experiences build on each other to produce a final result in which one is able to live free of inner bondage to desires, feelings, and the troublesome “self” composed of them. It is the inner equivalent of growing up to maturity.

Here are the stages in fuller detail:

Awakening
The outward voyage commences with the Awakening. Characteristically, this can take many forms. For some it may seem like a kind of call. A great Zen master was first stirred to seek enlightenment by hearing a crow caw in the middle of the night; St. Francis of Assisi heard the painted lips of Christ in a dilapidated chapel tell him to “Rebuild my church”—at first he took this order literally and started work; later he realized the command was meant spiritually as well.

Others may have a powerful conversion experience like Paul on the road to Damascus, or the many souls who have been saved at revival meetings. Sometimes this is a hard, powerful ordeal that begins with a strong conviction of sin, a realization of the emptiness and wrong in one’s life as it is, and ends with the tremendous ecstasy of knowing God’s forgiving grace. One feels reborn, a new person who can start off fresh from where she or he now is. Though the sins were as scarlet, one is now white as snow.

Still others may grow more quietly but surely toward a moment of realization that now it is time to begin a serious spiritual life, either in one’s natal religion or another. Whatever form it takes, something happens that causes one to set foot on the path.

The Awakening may at first inspire a deep commitment to the moral values associated with the religion in which it occurred. Indeed, at first, as the full meaning of the change is being sorted out, the aspirant may for a time be excessively rigorous and condemnatory. However, traditional teachers insist that a good moral life is foundational to spiritual advancement, and they also hold that it must be expressed in a loving way.

Figure 6.2 
Figure 6.2Saint Francis of Assisi

Source: PRISMA ARCHIVO/Alamy Stock Photo

Inevitably, though, problems arise. The Awakening is likely to be an intensely emotional experience, and intense emotions come and go. The day will come when the feelings are no longer there, and the aspirant may feel lost and abandoned by God, not understanding that the profoundest spirituality is more a deep inner peace than billowing emotionality.

Preparation and Purgation
It is needful, then, to direct the newfound spiritual energy into proper channels, as if digging irrigation canals to calm surging floodwaters and shunt them toward thirsty growing plants at regular times and in the right amount. This is the task of the Preparative stage. At this time it is important to have a regular spiritual discipline, prayer or meditation or yoga or whatever, which one practices on schedule whether one feels like it or not. The spirit becomes an ingrained part of one’s life, not subject to gusty moods and feelings, but a habitual part of life. Bad habits are also rooted out; this is the Purgative part of this stage.

Illumination
In time, the flowers planted, watered, and well cultivated in the Preparatory stage burst into bloom. The Illuminative stage is essentially a happy time of religious satisfaction: of prayers answered, blessings received, rich experience in worship, the presence of God near at hand. It may take different forms for different persons and in different traditions, but in all cases it is a divine consummation of the Awakening and Preparation. For many people, it is what religion is supposed to be all about and is enough.